---
layout: post
title: "Album of the Month March 2021: Oxyg&egrave;ne by Jean-Michel Jarre"
created: 2021-02-25 11:00:00 -0800
tags:
- Music
- Album of the Month
- Oxyg&egrave;ne
- Jean-Michel Jarre
- The Future Bites
- Steven Wilson
---

I'm back. As you may know, February was [The Future Bites][sw] month. This album grew on me over the course of the month. Wilson's production is, of course, excellent. My opinion regarding the album's standout songs has not changed much: [Man of the People][man-of-the-people] is by far my favourite song in this album. [King Ghost][king-ghost] is up there. The others are OK too. Here are my quick notes:

* _Unself_: need to listen to this one more
* _Self_: not bad
* _King Ghost_: like!
* _12 Things I Forgot_: great production as always but cheesy song; guitar at end sounds like the theme song from Father Ted, so&hellip;
* _Eminent Sleaze_: bass and production are great; verses are cool; organ is totally Floydesque (I'm sure I heard this song described as a _cut-rate Money_ somewhere on the Internet); chorus with backing vocals is cheesy; I like the nasty stabbing guitar solo sections
* _Man of the People_: great verse; guitar with harmonics over verse is nice; love the atmosphere; I can even tolerate the drum machine; chorus is good; like the dark synth stabs; my favourite song on the album
* _Personal Shopper_: I like the intro build-up and the vocals; all is great until the annoying chorus kicks in; maybe it'll grow on me&mdash;it didn't really
* _Follower_: an actual memorable hook!
* _Count of Unease_: I like this

Anyway, by the end of February, I started to get bored and I was ready to get started on something else. Perhaps this is natural after listening to the album repeatedly over the course of the month.

Anyway, I am ready to jump into March's Album of the Month. I covered brand-new stuff in January and February. In March, I'm going to take a trip back to 1977 with Oxyg&egrave;ne by [Jean-Michel Jarre][jean-michel-jarre]. I used to listen to these tunes a lot as a child before I got into guitars and stuff. Anyway, I came across [Oxyg&egrave;ne&mdash;Live in Your Living Room][live-in-your-living-room] on YouTube and was inspired to buy the original album. The CD arrived a couple of days ago and I was itching to listen to it and didn't want to wait until March! I slapped it on my phone and listened to the whole thing all the way through on my daily walk.

[jean-michel-jarre]: https://jeanmicheljarre.com/
[king-ghost]: https://youtu.be/zSvdLcS62ZM
[live-in-your-living-room]: https://youtu.be/H9UzNh_2TXk
[man-of-the-people]: https://youtu.be/G_yW8ornhK4
[sw]: http://stevenwilsonhq.com/sw/
